- [Instructor] It is important to understand servlets
because many other Java EE web technologies
are built on top of their request processing capabilities.
In order to get a deeper look at servlets,
we're going to go ahead and build out a project
that contains a simple servlet.
To do that, we can click on the file option within the menu
and then go to new and then dynamic web project.
And here, we're going to start to build out that project.
The project requires a name which is going to be
hsports-catalog-servlet.
And then we want to check that we are using
the Wildfly 17 runtime
and that we're using the dynamic web module version 4.0.
That corresponds with servlet specification 4.0
which was released in Java EE 8.
With those in place, just go ahead, hit next
and then we're taken to the dialog
to configure our source folders.
We're going to change this up some
so, select the source folder, hit remove
and then we'll add a source folder named source main Java
and then we're going to add another one named,
source main resources.
With those in place, we'll hit next
and this takes us to the web module dialog
and here, we configure the directory that's going to contain
all of our different web content.
In our case, we're going to switch up the content directory
and we're going to make it source main web app
and then we're going to go ahead and hit finish.
You'll see that our project gets created,
we have our source directories
and then, we're going to go ahead and add a servlet
to the source main Java directory.
So, you can do that by right-clicking, hovering over new
and then going to servlet or if you'd like,
you can just hit Ctrl + N to open the new dialog
and then type servlet and select it that way.
Once we've selected the servlet, we'll hit next and here,
we'll be able to configure that servlet.
So, we need to provide a package for the servlet.
It's going to be com.linkedin.servlet
and then our servlet's name is going to be catalogservlet.
And then I want to point out that you'll notice,
we have a superclass of HTTP servlet
so we're going to have inheritance here
and we'll be overriding some of the methods
on the HTTP servlet in a little bit here.
Let's go ahead and proceed
and then there's a very important configuration
on this dialog, the URL mapping.
So, when an HTTP request comes in to the servlet container,
it's going to look at the URL on that request
and if it notices this pattern, /catalogservlet,
it is then going to route that request
to our catalog servlet for processing.
So, it's very important that we have the mappings correct
that way, requests are routed to the appropriate servlet.
So, we'll leave that as the default
and we'll just move on from here.
And then, here's where we can select the different methods
that we would like to override on the HTTP servlet.
You'll notice that many of those methods
correspond with HTTP methods or operations,
so, you see get, post, put, delete.
In our case, we're just going to leave
do get and do post selected and then I want to highlight
the init and destroy methods.
So, these two methods are involved with the lifecycle
of the servlet so there's different events that occur
when the servlet's created and these two methods
provide hooks into that lifecycle so if there's logic
that you want to execute when the servlet's initialized
or when it's destroyed, you can override those methods
and provide your application logic there.
We're not going to do any of that in our example,
we're just going to be using do get
so, let's leave the defaults in place, hit finish.
Here, we see our first servlet, the catalog servlet
and let's just talk a little bit about it.
You see our two methods that we're overriding.
And take a look at the method signatures.
You'll notice they accept an HTTP servlet request
and an HTTP servlet response.
So, the request represents that incoming HTTP request
coming from the browser and we're able to pull information
off of the request and use it within our application logic
so we can grab things like parameters,
we can also look at cookies that come in,
there's all sorts of data
that we can pull off that request for our use.
And then the HTTP servlet response
is what we're going to build and send back to the browser.
And we can do things like add cookies, add headers
and then ultimately what we're building
is a response body that contains content
that the browser will leverage in some way.
So, let's go ahead and just do a little bit of work in here
and I'll remove all the existing code
and we'll just start from scratch.
So, what we're going to look at is building a response
and when we do that, we use the writer
and the writers use to send content out to the browser
via the response body and what we're going to do is,
append some content to that response body
and the content we're going to append
is actually going to be a parameter
that's coming in with the request.
So, we're going to grab a parameter
named name from the request and then simply,
reflect it back out to the browser.
With all of that in place, let's go ahead,
we can right-click and then go to run as
and then run on server.
It's going to ask us to select our server.
We would like the Wildfly 17 server
and go ahead and hit finish.
And there we see the application starting up.
So, let's grab the URL to our application
and I'm going to open it up in Chrome
and then you'll remember,
we need to send the request to the catalog servlet
and then it expects a parameter named name
and then I'm just going to provide my name
as the value for that parameter.
And when we do that, we get the content sent
with the response that was generated by the servlet.
So, that was our first look at servlets.
Extremely important technology
because of the web capabilities that they enable.